feat: add initial Full-stack Signals documentation (#3797)
vaadin/docs: articles/hilla/guides/full-stack-signals.adoc

---
title: Full-stack Signals
description: A full-stack signal is a special type that is designed to share and synchronize the state between the server and clients in real-time.
order: 130
---

= [since:com.vaadin:vaadin@V24.5]#Full-stack Signals#

> When building a modern web application, you often need to synchronize the state between the server and clients. For example, you might want to notify all connected clients in a chat application when a new message is posted, visualize the interactions of multiple users editing the same record in a form, or when the status of an order in an e-commerce application changes. This is even more tricky when you this updates to be propagated to the clients in real-time. This is where full-stack signals come into play.

Reviewer: The three examples are a when, a verb and another when, there's no consistency.
Check "when you this updates".
Real-time is not an adjective here, so no dash.

Author: done.

> A full-stack signal can be seen as a special data-type that holds the shared state, and enables the clients to subscribe to it for receiving real-time updates when the state changes. The state can be updated by any client, and the changes are automatically propagated to all other clients that are subscribed to the signal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A full-stack signal can be seen as a special data type that holds the shared state, and enables the clients to subscribe to it for receiving real-time updates when the state changes. The state can be updated by any client, and the changes are automatically propagated to all other clients that are subscribed to the signal.
```

In this guide, you will learn how to create and use full-stack signals in your Vaadin applications.

[NOTE]
Full-stack signals are still under active development and is not yet suitable for production use. Thus, to use them in your Vaadin projects, you need to explicitly enable the experimental feature in Copilot, or by manually adding `com.vaadin.experimental.fullstackSignals=true` to the [filename]`src/main/resources/vaadin-featureflags.properties` file.

[NOTE]

> At the moment, the implementation of full-stack signals are only available for Vaadin Hilla applications that use the **React** library for rendering the user interfaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the moment, the implementation of full-stack signals is only available for Vaadin Hilla applications that use the **React** library to render the user interfaces.
```

[[server-side-signal-instance]]
== Server-side Full-stack Signal Instance

> The purpose of a full-stack signal is to share and synchronize the state between the server and clients in real-time. In Vaadin Hilla applications, you can do that by creating an instance of one of the available full-stack signal types and returning it normally from your [classname]`@BrowserCallable` annotated services. In the following example an instance of a [classname]`ValueSignal` is created and returned from a server-side endpoint:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The purpose of a full-stack signal is to share and synchronize the state between the server and clients in real time. In Vaadin Hilla applications, you can do that by creating an instance of one of the available full-stack signal types and returning it from your [classname]`@BrowserCallable` annotated services. In the following example an instance of a [classname]`ValueSignal` is created and returned from a server-side endpoint:
```
The word "endpoint" should be avoided.

[source,java]
.VoteService.java
----
package com.example.application;

import com.vaadin.flow.server.auth.AnonymousAllowed;
import com.vaadin.hilla.BrowserCallable;

import com.vaadin.hilla.signal.ValueSignal;

@AnonymousAllowed
@BrowserCallable
public class VoteService {
    private final ValueSignal<Boolean> started =

>                     new ValueSignal<>(false, Boolean.class); <1>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                    new ValueSignal<>(false, Boolean.class); // <1>
```

    public ValueSignal<Boolean> startedSignal() {

>         return started; <2>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        return started; // <2>
```

The above example demonstrates a simple polling service that uses a [classname]`ValueSignal` to share a [classname]`Boolean` state of whether the voting has started or not. The clients can subscribe to this signal and receive real-time updates when the state changes. Based on this state, the clients can then start or stop the voting process.

[NOTE]
For a complete list of available full-stack signal types, see <<available-full-stack-signal-types>>.

[[client-subscription]]
== Subscription to a Full-stack Signal

For a client to receive real-time updates when the state of a full-stack signal changes, it needs to subscribe to the signal. This can be done as simple as calling any normal Vaadin endpoint. The following example demonstrates how to subscribe to the `started` signal created in the previous section:

[source,tsx]
.vote.tsx
----
import { VoteService } from "Frontend/generated/endpoints.js";
import { Button } from '@vaadin/react-components/Button.js';

const votingStarted = VoteService.startedSignal({ defaultValue: false }); <1>

export default function VoteView() {
  return (
    <>

>       <span>Is voting in progress: {votingStarted.value ? 'Yes' : 'No'}</span> <2>
>       <Button onClick={() => votingStarted.value = !votingStarted.value} <3>
>               theme={votingStarted.value ? 'error' : ''}
>               >{votingStarted.value ? 'Stop' : 'Start'} Voting

Reviewer 2: Let's use comments to render callouts properly:

```suggestion
      <span>Is voting in progress: {votingStarted.value ? 'Yes' : 'No'}</span> {/* <2> */}
      <Button
        onClick={() => (votingStarted.value = !votingStarted.value) /* <3> */}
        theme={votingStarted.value ? 'error' : ''}
      >
        {votingStarted.value ? 'Stop' : 'Start'} Voting
```

      </Button>
    </>
  );
}
----

> <1> Subscribe to the `started` signal and set the default value to `false`.

Reviewer: I'd explain that this default value is for this client and not sent to the server.

Author: done.

<2> Render the current state of the signal by accessing its `value` property.

> <3> Toggling (changing) the state by setting the `value` property of the signal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<3> Toggle (change) the state by setting the `value` property of the signal.
```

[[available-full-stack-signal-types]]
== Available Full-stack Signal Types

> The full-stack signals are designed to be used in various scenarios, and based on the requirement different types of full-stack signals are used. The server-side signal types are available in the `com.vaadin.hilla.signals` package, and their client-side counterparts are available in `@vaadin/hilla-react-signals`. As this is currently under active development, more signal types are released with every new release, but at the moment, the available ones are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The full-stack signals are designed to be used in various scenarios, and based on the requirement different types of full-stack signals are used. The server-side signal types are available in the `com.vaadin.hilla.signals` package, and their client-side counterparts are available in `@vaadin/hilla-react-signals`. As this is currently under active development, more signal types are added at each new release, but, at the moment, the available ones are:
```

<3> The signal instance that holds the shared state of the person.
<4> The service method that returns the signal instance. The [classname]`@Nonnull` annotations are used to indicate that both the returned signal and its value are never null. If the signal instance or its value can be null, you can remove the `@Nonnull` annotations.

Though, the above example shows the usage of a record, you can also use classes with mutable properties and there are no technical limitations on the way, as the wrapped value of the signal is always replaced with a new instance whenever an update is applied to the signals. However, as a universal rule, the usage of immutable types is always preferred while dealing with share values, as it helps to reduce the confusions and potential bugs that might arise from the shared mutable state.

Having a [classname]`@BrowserCallable` annotated service with a method that returns a [classname]`ValueSignal` instance similar to the above example, enables the client-side code to subscribe to it simply by calling the service method:

[source,tsx]
.person.tsx
----

> import { VerticalLayout } from "@vaadin/react-components/VerticalLayout";
> import { Button } from "@vaadin/react-components/Button.js";

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import { Button, VerticalLayout } from '@vaadin/react-components';
```

> import { ValueSignal } from "@vaadin/hilla-react-signals";
> import { PersonService } from "Frontend/generated/endpoints.js";
> import type Person from "Frontend/generated/com/example/application/services/PersonService/Person.js";

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import { ValueSignal } from '@vaadin/hilla-react-signals';
import { PersonService } from 'Frontend/generated/endpoints.js';
import type Person from 'Frontend/generated/com/example/application/services/PersonService/Person.js';
```

const sharedPerson: ValueSignal<Person> =

>           PersonService.sharedPerson({ defaultValue: { name: '', age: 0 } }); <1>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          PersonService.sharedPerson({ defaultValue: { name: '', age: 0 } }); // <1>
```

export default function PersonView() {
  return (
    <VerticalLayout theme="padding">

>       <span>Name: {sharedPerson.value.name}</span> <2>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      <span>Name: {sharedPerson.value.name}</span> {/* <2> */}
```

      <span>Age: {sharedPerson.value.age}</span>
      <Button onClick={() =>

>           sharedPerson.value = { <3>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
         sharedPerson.value = { // <3>
```

            name: sharedPerson.value.name,
            age: sharedPerson.value.age + 1
          }}>Increase age</Button>
    </VerticalLayout>
  );
}
----

> <1> Subscribing to the `sharedPerson` signal and setting the default value to an empty person. This client-side default value is used when rendering the component before the first update from the server-side signal is received.

Reviewer: This is the explanation I was expecting above. It is probably redundant to duplicate, so we should make a choice about where to explain it. Other notes are partially duplicated too.

Author: I'd move it to the comment on the above, and remove it from here.

Author: done.

[NOTE]
Given the nature of the signals, only changing the value of the signal will cause the signal's subscribers to be notified. Changing the internal properties of the value object will not trigger an update.

==== Setting the Value
All signals have a `value` property that can be used to both set and read the value of the signal. However, when it comes to setting a shared value among multiple clients concurrently, it can lead to overwriting each other's changes. Thus, [classname]`ValueSignal` provides extra methods to set the value in different situations:

- `set(value: T): void`: Sets the given value as the signals value. It is the same as assigning to the `value` property directly. Note that the value change event that is propagated to the server as the result of this operation is not taking the last seen value into account and will overwrite the shared value on the server unconditionally (AKA: "Last Write Wins").

> - `replace(expected: T, newValue: T): void`: Replaces the value with a new one only if the current value is equal to the expected value. This means that a state change request is sent to the server asking it _"compare and set"_. At the time of processing this requested change on the server, if the current value is not equal to the expected value, the update is rejected by the server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `replace(expected: T, newValue: T): void`: Replaces the value with a new one only if the current value is equal to the expected value. This means that a state change request is sent to the server asking it to _"compare and set"_. At the time of processing this requested change on the server, if the current value is not equal to the expected value, the update is rejected by the server.
```

> - `update(updater: (current: T) => T): OperationSubscription`: Tries to update the value by applying the callback function to the current value. When the new value is calculated, a "compare and set" operation is sent to the server, and in case of a concurrent change the update is rejected, the callback is run again with an updated current value. This is repeated until the result can be applied without concurrent changes, or the operation is canceled by calling the `cancel()` function of the returned `OperationSubscription`.

Reviewer: It can be useful to underline that the "compare and set" is based on Java equality, so the value class should implement it.

Author: I was a bit hesitant to include it due to the on-going discussion we had around the idea of holding the initial value as JSON instead, and the impact it has on the way of checking equality. But, since this feature is behind a feature flag, behavioural changes like this could be acceptable(?)

Author: Added.

[NOTE]
There is no guarantee that `cancel()` will be effective always, since a succeeding operation might already be on its way to the server.

[[number-signal]]
=== NumberSignal
The [classname]`NumberSignal` is a full-stack signal that holds a numeric value. This numeric value is of type [classname]`Double` in Java, and of type `number` in the client-side code. The [classname]`NumberSignal` can be considered a special case of the [classname]`ValueSignal` that is optimized for numeric values by introducing a built-in support for atomic increment and decrement operations. The following example demonstrates how to create and use a [classname]`NumberSignal` in a service class:

[source,java]
.CounterService.java
----
package com.example.application;

import com.vaadin.flow.server.auth.AnonymousAllowed;
import com.vaadin.hilla.BrowserCallable;

import com.vaadin.hilla.signals.NumberSignal;

@AnonymousAllowed
@BrowserCallable
public class CounterService {

>     private final NumberSignal counter = new NumberSignal(1.0); <1>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    private final NumberSignal counter = new NumberSignal(1.0); // <1>
```

>     public NumberSignal counter() { <2>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    public NumberSignal counter() { // <2>
```

        return counter;
    }
}
----
<1> Create an instance of a [classname]`NumberSignal` with initial client-side value of `1`. If no value provided to the constructor, it defaults to an initial value of `0`.
<2> Return the instance of the [classname]`NumberSignal` from the `counter` method.

The above example demonstrates a simple counter service that uses a [classname]`NumberSignal` to share a numeric value. The clients can subscribe to this signal, and apart from receiving real-time updates, it can initiate atomic increment and decrement operations as well:

[source,tsx]
.counter.tsx
----

> import { Button } from '@vaadin/react-components/Button.js';
> import { VerticalLayout } from "@vaadin/react-components/VerticalLayout.js";

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import { Button, VerticalLayout } from '@vaadin/react-components';
```

> import { CounterService } from "Frontend/generated/endpoints.js";

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import { CounterService } from 'Frontend/generated/endpoints.js';
```

> const counter = CounterService.counter(); <1>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
const counter = CounterService.counter(); // <1>
```

export default function() {
  return (
    <VerticalLayout>

>       <span>Counter: {counter}</span> <2>
>       <Button onClick={() => counter.incrementBy(5)}>Increase by 5</Button> <3>
>       <Button onClick={() => counter.incrementBy(-3)}>Decrease by 3</Button> <4>
>       <Button onClick={() => counter.value = 0}>Reset</Button> <5>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      <span>Counter: {counter}</span> {/* <2> */}
      <Button onClick={() => counter.incrementBy(5)}>Increase by 5</Button> {/* <3> */}
      <Button onClick={() => counter.incrementBy(-3)}>Decrease by 3</Button> {/* <4> */}
      <Button onClick={() => counter.value = 0}>Reset</Button> {/* <5> */}
```

    </VerticalLayout>
  );
}
----
<1> Subscribe to the `counter` signal. Note that the subscription is done outside the render function to avoid creating a new subscription on each render.
<2> Render the current value of the signal.
<3> Increase the value of the signal using the atomic [methodname]`incrementBy` operation.
<4> Decrease the value of the signal using the atomic [methodname]`incrementBy` operation and providing a negative value.
<5> Reset the value of the signal to `0` by assigning a new value to the signal.

Note that the `incrementBy` operation is atomic, meaning that it is guaranteed to succeed without any concurrent changes. If there are concurrent changes, the operation is retried until it can be applied successfully. This ensures that `n` increments or decrements are always applied correctly, even if there are multiple clients trying to update the value concurrently.

> As [classname]`NumberSignal` is a [classname]`ValueSignal` only with additional atomic operations, it inherits all the methods such as `replace` and `update`, so if there is no need for supporting atomic operations, the inherited methods can be used for wider range of operations.

Reviewer: Isn't `replace` atomic also? Can the value change between compare and set?

Author: Well, the usage of the word "atomic" was a bit unfortunate maybe. The server-side block of code that is responsible for applying all the operations is blocking, so a `replace` also compare and set the value atomically.

But, what is different for `incrementBy` operation is that no current value is sent to the server based on the client-side "current" state, so even reading of current value of and applying the change on top of it is done in the same blocking code. so there's no chance of failure for "incrementBy", but a "replace" could be rejected.

Maybe we can call it "special" operation. I'm open to ideas.

Reviewer: I "discussed" this topic with ChatGPT and its final proposal is:

- `replace` is a "conditional atomic operation" (or "strict atomic operation");
- `incrementBy` is an "incremental atomic operation" (or "progressive atomic operation"), and `update` should also be one of those.

I like "conditional" and "incremental" more than the alternatives.

Author: I avoided using the the "conditional atomic" since it sounded a bit confusing whether it refers to "a conditional atomicity when the change is applied" or "an atomic operation that can succeed conditionally". But, adopted the "incremental" one. Rephrased the sentences in multiple places of the document (e.g. in setting the value part of ValueSignal section), and removed the unnecessary confusing stuff from the above sentence. Hope it's better now.

== Service Method Parameters

When creating the service methods that return full-stack signals, you can accept parameters as well, similar to any other endpoints. This opens up a wide range of possibilities for dynamically returning different signals instances. The following example demonstrates how to create a service method that returns different signal instances based on the passed in argument:

[source,java]
.VoteService.java
----
package com.example.application;

import java.util.HashMap;
import java.util.List;
import java.util.Map;
import com.vaadin.flow.server.auth.AnonymousAllowed;
import com.vaadin.hilla.BrowserCallable;

import com.vaadin.hilla.signal.ValueSignal;
import com.vaadin.hilla.signals.NumberSignal;

@AnonymousAllowed
@BrowserCallable
public class VoteService {
    private static final List<String> VOTE_OPTIONS = List.of(
                "option1", "option2", "option3");

    private final Map<String, NumberSignal> voteOptions = new HashMap<>();

    public VoteService() {
        VOTE_OPTIONS.forEach(option ->
                voteOptions.put(option, new NumberSignal()));
    }

    public List<String> voteOptions() {
        return VOTE_OPTIONS;
    }

>     public NumberSignal voteOptionSignal(String option) { <1>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    public NumberSignal voteOptionSignal(String option) { // <1>
```

description: A full-stack signal is a special type that is designed to share and synchronize the state between the server and clients in real time.
order: 130
---

= [since:com.vaadin:vaadin@V24.5]#Full Stack Signals#

When building a modern web application, you often need to synchronize the state between the server and clients. For example, you might want to notify all connected clients in a chat application when a new message is posted, visualize multiple users interacting while editing the same record in a form, or update clients when the status of an order changes in an e-commerce application. This becomes even trickier when you need these updates to be propagated to clients in real time. This is where full-stack signals come into play.

A full-stack signal can be seen as a special data type that holds the shared state, and enables the clients to subscribe to it for receiving real-time updates when the state changes. The state can be updated by any client, and the changes are automatically propagated to all other clients that are subscribed to the signal.

In this guide, you learn how to create and use full-stack signals in your Vaadin applications.

[NOTE]

> Full-stack signals are still under active development and is not yet suitable for production use. Thus, to use them in your Vaadin projects, you need to explicitly enable the experimental feature in Copilot, or by manually adding `com.vaadin.experimental.fullstackSignals=true` to the [filename]`src/main/resources/vaadin-featureflags.properties` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Full-stack signals are still under active development and are not yet suitable for production use. Thus, to use them in your Vaadin projects, you need to explicitly enable the experimental feature in Copilot, or by manually adding `com.vaadin.experimental.fullstackSignals=true` to the [filename]`src/main/resources/vaadin-featureflags.properties` file.
```

    public ValueSignal<Boolean> startedSignal() {
        return started; // <2>
    }
}
----
// vale:on

<1> Create an instance of a [classname]`ValueSignal` with an initial value of false.
<2> Return the instance of the [classname]`ValueSignal` from the [methodname]`startedSignal` method.

[CAUTION]
The server-side instance of a full-stack signal is meant to be created once and shared across all clients. Thus, it is recommended to create the instance as a field in a service class, and return it from the methods. This way, all clients are able to subscribe to the same signal instance and receive real-time updates when the state changes.

The above example demonstrates a simple polling service that uses a [classname]`ValueSignal` to share a [classname]`Boolean` state of whether the voting has started or not. The clients can subscribe to this signal and receive real-time updates when the state changes. Based on this state, the clients can then start or stop the voting process.

[NOTE]
For a complete list of available full-stack signal types, see <<available-full-stack-signal-types>>.

[[client-subscription]]
== Subscription to a Full-stack Signal

> For a client to receive real-time updates when the state of a full-stack signal changes, it needs to subscribe to the signal. This can be done as simple as calling any normal Vaadin endpoint. The following example demonstrates how to subscribe to the `started` signal created in the previous section:

Reviewer: Avoid using "endpoint".

Author: Done.

    @Nonnull
    public ValueSignal<@Nonnull Person> sharedPerson() { // <4>
        return sharedPerson;
    }
}
----
// vale:on

<1> A record type that represents a JSON-serializable type, in this case a person with a name and age.
<2> The initial value of the signal. This initial value remains the same until an update is submitted to the signal.
<3> The signal instance that holds the shared state of the person.
<4> The service method that returns the signal instance. The [classname]`@Nonnull` annotations are used to indicate that both the returned signal and its value are never null. If the signal instance or its value can be null, you can remove the `@Nonnull` annotations.

Though, the above example shows the usage of a record, you can also use classes with mutable properties and there are no technical limitations on the way, as the wrapped value of the signal is always replaced with a new instance whenever an update is applied to the signals. However, as a universal rule, the usage of immutable types is always preferred while dealing with share values, as it helps to reduce the confusions and potential bugs that might arise from the shared mutable state.

> Having a [classname]`@BrowserCallable` annotated service with a method that returns a [classname]`ValueSignal` instance similar to the above example, enables the client-side code to subscribe to it by calling the service method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having a [classname]`@BrowserCallable`-annotated service with a method that returns a [classname]`ValueSignal` instance similar to the above example, enables the client-side code to subscribe to it by calling the service method:
```
